fleet organization to serve a group of customers or locations
The Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP), first introduced by
University, 1034  Budapest, Hungary
The vehicle routing problem with time windows (VRPTW) has gained much attention recently due to its wide applica -
lems. This paper proposes a novel membrane-inspired evolutionary algorithm framework (MEAF) consisting of isolated
of local optima, MEAF offers a promising solution to address complex problems. The effectiveness of the proposed MEAF
is verified by applying three classical metaheuristics, namely Genetic Algorithm (GA), Ant Colony System (ACS), and
Particle Swarm Algorithm (PSO), to solve the VRPTW problem. The experiments are run on 56 instances of Solomon
with 100 client benchmarks. The evaluation of the experimental results combined with the mean and standard deviation
Over the years, numerous variants of the VRP have been
including the Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem, the
Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows (VRPTW),
the Vehicle Routing Problem with Pickup and Delivery, the
Multi-Depot Vehicle Routing Problem, and the Stochastic
Vehicle Routing Problem. Among these, the VRPTW is
vehicle capacities but also adhering to strict service time
ance multiple constraints, such as vehicle capacity and cus-
tomer time windows, which adds layers of complexity to
lated Annealing [9], Tabu Search [10], Particle Swarm Opti-
for the VRPTW, a notable gap remains in the practical
By leveraging the hierarchical organization and parallel
framework that combines Genetic Algorithm (GA), Particle
Swarm Optimization (PSO), and Ant Colony System (ACS)
approaches that rely on a single metaheuristic, MEAF
seamlessly integrates GA, ACS, and PSO within a uni -
● Scalability and Robustness : Extensive experiments
on 56 VRPTW benchmark instances demonstrate that
MEAF consistently outperforms its component algo -
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2,
sentation of ACS, GA, and PSO. In Section 4, we propose
the membrane evolutionary algorithm framework (MEAF).
Section 5 extends MEAF to introduce the MEA VRPTW.
Section 6 presents an experimental comparison and analysis
of the MEA VRPTW algorithm against the algorithms that
approaches for solving the Vehicle Routing Problem with
Time Windows (VRPTW). These methods, including vari -
tive time windows and capacity constraints (see studies such
cle capacity Q and customer acceptance time windows need
to be considered when optimizing fleet organization to serve
of qi > 0 to be delivered with a time window [bi,e i], bi is
and ei is the ending time allowed to receive goods. A vehicle
Euclidean distance. A set of homogeneous vehicles K with
capacity Q are used to serve the customer set V ′.
1, if vehiclek travels from vi to vj
the time window and capacity constraints. Typically, the
Annealing [9], Tabu Search [10], Particle Swarm Optimiza-
The Self-competitive Particle Swarm Optimization
(ScPSO) algorithm introduced by Wang et al. [ 29] is one
search ability and population diversity. Additionally, ScPSO
performance of the swarm.
tialization with the Solomon Insertion heuristic to create
a diverse initial population, improving exploration and
ing individual algorithms on benchmark functions despite
putational paradigm inspired by the organization and func -
population-based optimizer such as a Genetic Algorithm
(GA) evolving within one membrane, which occasionally
rithmic frameworks, including our proposed MEAF model,
vehicle can be loaded beyond its capacity. Equation 6 states
that each vehicle leaves depot 0 and eventually returns to
vehicle must have sufficient time to return to the depot after
the serving time adheres to the time window.
imagine a population-based optimizer (e.g., a GA) evolving within one
used to update the pheromone after one iteration, but in
ACS, only the global best Ant was allowed to add a pher -
omone after each iteration, which means that only those
With this change, ACS has proven to be more effective
the trial. Lgb  could be substituted as Lib, called iteration-
rules at the end of each iteration, ACS also uses local update
able for a following ant. This way, the other ants’ exploration
may try to execute the transition rule again to regenerate
the next location and assign a new vehicle if it is still not
There are five main steps: population initialization, evalua -
This part describes the ant colony system (ACS) [27] applied
with the ACS, that can be applied to the VRPTW problem.
of efficiency. Regarding the original ant system, it is a meta-
inspired algorithm inspired by the behavior of ants searching
for food. A pheromone is a means ants use to communicate
more attractive they are to the ants. Assuming that all ants
point to the destination, ants that choose shorter paths will
Considering pheromones’ effect on ants, all ants will choose
ing. The ACS improves the transition rules and pheromone
The ACS algorithm consists of four key steps, i.e., phero-
Transition rule In ACS, transition rules consist of explo -
ration and exploitation strategies, using a parameter q0 to
q0 is a parameter 0 ≤ q0 ≤ 1, τ (r, s) means the pheromone
When applied to the VRPTW problem, vehicles must be
constraint. The task sequence is assigned to a vehicle when
the constraint is satisfied, and new vehicles continue to
3.5 Particle swarm optimization
3.5.1 Standard PSO algorithm
In this section, the conventional particle swarm optimi -
zation (PSO) is introduced briefly. It is a metaheuristic
By applying the PSO algorithm, the ith particle’s posi -
represents the swarm size. Furthermore, the ith particle’s
vector: V i =( vi1,vi2, ..., viD )(i=1 ,2, ..., m). In PSO,
of the swarm. One particle’s own experience refers to the
“pbest”. The experience of the swarm refers to the best
position found by any particle in the swarm so far, which is
are positive constants, called learning rates, and r1 and r2
number of iterations is reached or attain a satisfactory fit -
ness value. The standard PSO algorithm is suitable for
Step1. Population initialization.  One population
means one solution to the problem. The population size
is a parameter that could be adjusted depending on the
nature of the problem. The initial population could be
duced above with the standard PSO; then, it’s the discrete
PSO for TSP. The remaining processing is the same as the
GA algorithm when applied to the VRPTW problem.
optimal solutions, sensitivity to parameter settings, and the
while mitigating their drawbacks, our proposed framework
so, we address issues like parameter sensitivity and the ten-
tion rules, and its populations can be rearranged into other
In this subsection, we describe the details of the MEAF
PSO can also be modified to handle discrete problems.
3.5.2 Discrete PSO algorithm
describe applying the discrete PSO algorithm to solve the
different PSO methods for solving TSP problems. Here we
structure, each elementary membrane hosts a population
for a specific evolutionary algorithm (EA). The populations
Fig. 3 Membrane structure proposed in the MEAF framework. Each
guide further evolution (e.g., the GA membrane can directly use exter-
they evolved. Population exchange at this point will only
result in meaningless communication loss. Population com-
One is the number of independent evolution iterations, and
the other is the number of iterations where the optimal solu-
iteration. However, the communication in rules can also dif-
populations directly as ordinary individuals joining the clus-
quently describe the fusion strategies of ACS, PSO, and GA.
In the proposed MEAF structure, each basic EA occu -
phase are crucial parameters that influence the effectiveness
of the MEAF. These rules are designed to balance explo -
lution is a key feature of the MEAF. In the isolated phase,
ary algorithms, MEAF provides a flexible and powerful
isolated and cooperative evolution phases enables MEAF to
key parameters of the MEAF framework are summarized
5 MEAVRPTW
This section introduces a specific application of the MEAF
framework to solve the VRPTW. In selecting ACS, GA, and
PSO as the elementary evolutionary algorithms, we have
ACS and GA are recognized for their robust convergence
Genetic Algorithms (GAs) utilize selection, crossover,
Ant Colony System (ACS) excels in dynamic and combi -
solution construction. PSO, typically used for continuous
However, including PSO broadens the scope of optimiza -
tion strategies and tests the MEAF framework’s ability to
exclude unsuitable algorithms. PSO’s unique concepts like
without substantial improvements. By contrast, ACS, GA,
and PSO have demonstrated their foundational impact and
In summary, ACS, GA, and PSO were selected for their
tion of optimization strategies and underscores the MEAF
produced by the fitness function. The parameters sditer  and
tion iterations and the number of minimum evolutionary
determines the number of iterations of the algorithm and
MEAF operates as a cooperative hybrid framework inte-
grating ACS, PSO, and GA. Each algorithm evolves inde -
pendently at the population level, maintaining its own search
coordination, MEAF preserves full algorithmic autonomy
serves population diversity, offering advantages over both
Table 1 MEAF Framework: Parameter Definitions and Defaults
Parameter Explanation Default/Range
T Minimum iterations to keep the
M Iterations between successive
sditer Earliest iteration to start applying
maxiter Maximum number of iterations for
experiment
3)GA In the selection step of the genetic algorithm, we
first select candidate parents from the population using
plexity of the GA algorithm is referred to in article [ 49] as
O(I× N × D ), the computational complexity of the PSO
and the computational complexity of the ACS algorithm is
denotes the number of iterations, D denotes the dimension-
denotes the number of populations. The MEA VRPTW
parameters, which are O(I× N × D 2) in the worst case,
6 Experiments and results analysis
In the experiments, we chose Solomon’s VRPTW bench -
mark problem with 100 customers [ 52]. The benchmark
mixture of random and clustering. The property of vehicle
capacity is small in problem sets R1, C1, and RC1. In con -
trast, the vehicle capacity is large in problem sets R1, C1,
This section is organized as follows:
where optSoli means the optimal solution until iteration i, T
tion hasn’t changed in Titer  iterations.
where iternow  means the iteration times until now, iterout
means the iteration times of the last communication out, and
nication happens every M iteration.
1)ACS As shown in Section 3.3, the core operations of
the ACS are on pheromones, including local pheromone
2)PSO The core of the particle algorithm is to update
For the framework parameters, the T parameter deter -
mines the minimum number of stable iterations before an
gence. The M parameter controls the iteration intervals
The earliest start dissolution iteration ( sditer ) parameter
dissolved. It is crucial to avoid setting this parameter too
Fine-tuning this parameter helps maintain algorithm diver -
Additionally, the ACS algorithm includes a top-k param-
By focusing on these framework-specific parameters and
the additional ACS parameter, we can effectively balance
the exploration and exploitation within the MEAF frame -
For all the 56 benchmark instances, algorithms were run
the maximum iteration number each time was 500. Regard-
ing the initial paths of the particle swarm optimization and
tic to generate them. The selection phase of GA uses a com-
selection. In each iteration, we used Truncation Selection
to select ts percent from the entire population and then we
the filtered population to produce a new generation. For the
● In the Experiment setup, we describe the parameters
and experimental environment used for evaluating the
adjusting parameters.
compared to elementary algorithms (ACS, PSO, and
GA). Then, we introduce a comparison with recently
6.1 Experiment setup
Java programming language. All experiments were con -
The parameter settings for the algorithms used in this
literature review, and preliminary experiments. This part
introduces the strategy for tuning parameters within our
MEAF framework, focusing on framework-specific param-
eters. The parameters for GA, PSO, and ACS follow their
Table 2 Parameter settings for the algorithms used in this paper
algorithm name parameter explanation value
parameter ρ for pheromone evaporation 0.3
parameter q0 for exploitation or exploration
parameter β for distance influence control 2
parameter top-k for filter the exchange
population size 100
parameter ts for truncation selection 0.2
parameter mr for mutation ration 0.5
Particle Swarm
swarm size 100
parameter w for inertia weight 0.1
MEA VRPTW parameter T for at least keep the same time
parameter M for iteration of exchange
parameter easthreshold  for the minimum
parameter sditer  for the earliest start dis-
solve iteration
parameter dfpercent  for dissolve factor 0.85
the customer time window; 75 customers in R208 have a
dow than those in R211. The GA algorithm and the PSO
tion but only schedule vehicles according to the restrictions
in the final stage of execution. On the other hand, the ACS
ing the next direction of the ants. When the time window
ant algorithm is more apparent compared to GA and PSO,
tion to that. when the ACS algorithm is not as good as GA
for use cases R102 and R105, where the time window of
ACS algorithm is more evident now. Solving this problem
GA and PSO algorithms, which can be the direction of our
designed for continuous optimization problems, the PSO
VRPTW is a discrete problem, the PSO algorithm needs
to be discretized, but experimental results indicate that the
ing are ineffective in harnessing the strengths of PSO for
VRPTW. This suggests that PSO requires more advanced
mization. In contrast, the Ant Colony System (ACS) algo -
effectively incorporating time window constraints into the
route construction process. By enabling ants to communicate
and share information through pheromone updates, ACS
reinforces more favorable routes that adhere to time window
constraints and minimize total travel in VRPTW. Regarding
Genetic Algorithms (GA), the selection and mutation com -
GA may yield slightly inferior results compared to ACS. Tra-
ditional GA methods often fail to explicitly consider these
tions. In contrast, ACS incorporates a pheromone-updating
mechanism that considers time window constraints during
eters that occurred in the experiment, as shown in Table 2.
MEAF introduces several framework-specific param -
used in the main experiments. A sensitivity analysis of these
parameters is presented in Appendix A, as shown in Fig 5.
The results of the experiment comparing the elemen -
tary algorithms are shown in Table 3. This table presents
the outcomes for 56 instances run on ACS, PSO, GA, and
cost reduction = M in(ACS Avg. , PSOAvg. , GAAvg. )− OurAvg.
M in(ACS Avg. , PSOAvg. , GAAvg. )  (22)
As shown in Table 3, for problem sets C1 and C2,
instances. Except for MEA VRPTW, the ACS performed the
best, winning 14 out of 17 solutions compared to GA and
PSO. As for problem sets R1 and R2, MEA VRPTW also
Except for MEA VRPTW, the ACS performed better on 17
of these instances, and the GA performed better on the
Except for MEA VRPTW, ACS performed better in all 11
instances, while GA performed better in the remaining 5
Moreover, from the experimental run logs, we can see that
the PSO algorithm dissolves 21*56=1176 runs. The experi-
can identify and filter out the bad algorithms in the runs.
From the experimental data of the individually run algo -
the results of ACS, followed by GA, and lastly comes PSO.
are not as good as the ACS and GA algorithms. The analysis
ACS PSO GA MEA VRPTW
Table 3 Experiment results of MEA VRPTW compared with ACS, PSO, GA on 56 benchmark instances
Fig. 4 Convergence graph for algorithms running with 500 iterations on 6 benchmark instances
ACS PSO GA MEA VRPTW
Table 3 (continued)
cost of ACS, PSO, and GA components. Its computational
time is generally faster than that of ACS, while being slower
than PSO and GA. This intermediate runtime is expected,
(MEAF) is to provide a modular framework that integrates
multiple metaheuristics (ACS, PSO, GA) with minimal
comprehensive benchmarking against recent hybrid meth -
to contextualize MEAF within the broader landscape of
rithm framework (MEAF), which combines four evolution-
computation and biological evolution, MEAF aims to har -
mation exchange, MEAF enables collaborative evolution
rithm, which applies the MEAF framework to address the
VRPTW. The MEA VRPTW algorithm combines ACS,
yielded the best results in the experimental process, show -
eters, it takes about 21 seconds to run the ACS algorithm
once, about 7 seconds to run the GA algorithm once, and
about 2 seconds to run the PSO algorithm once. Since the
PSO algorithm was introduced to verify that the algorithm
framework can identify inferior algorithms, PSO will dis -
most of the runs in the algorithm framework are ACS and
GA algorithms, the running time of the hybrid algorithm is
the average running time of the GA algorithm and the ACS
The results of the experiment comparing the recently devel-
56 benchmark instances. The test yielded a statistic of 276.74
rank tests [54] to compare MEA VRPTW against each baseline
age computational time (in seconds) of ACS, PSO, GA,
and MEA VRPTW over 21 runs. These results provide a
Table 4 Experiment results of MEA VRPTW compared with COA, OOA, POA on 56 benchmark instances
GA, and PSO to form the elementary algorithm within
the MEAF’s framework. We conducted our experiments
using 56 instances from Solomon’s VRPTW benchmark
GA, ACS, and PSO, MEA VRPTW achieved superior perfor-
analysis of the experimental programs log revealed that all
PSO running units were eliminated during the early stages of
evolution. This proves that the MEAF algorithm framework
the experimental result data and convergence curves, we
MEAF’s framework efficacy in solving real-world problems.
Table 5 Average computational time (in seconds) of ACS, PSO, GA, and
MEA VRPTW after 21 runs
inst. ACS PSO GA MEA VRPTW
inst. ACS PSO GA MEA VRPTW
Instance MEA VRPTW ACS PSO GA
Based on the sensitivity analysis, MEAF is robust to varia-
tions in the parameters. The recommended ranges for practical
0.75–0.90. These ranges provide guidance for parameter tuning
Fig. 5 Sensitivity analysis of four key MEAF parameters on the Solo -
independent runs for each parameter configuration. Parameters ana -
lyzed are T (minimum iterations before exchange), M (exchange inter-
val), sditer (earliest iteration to start dissolution), and dfpercent (dis-
algorithm stability. The results show that MEAF is generally robust
across the tested parameter ranges
cle routing problem with time windows. Eur J Oper Res
rithm for the vehicle routing and scheduling problem with time
for routeing problems with time windows. J Oper Res Soc
27. Dorigo M, Gambardella LM (1997) Ant colony system: a cooper-
competition particle swarm optimization algorithm for the vehi -
cle routing problem with time window. IEEE Access
using hybrid genetic algorithm (hga): a solution to the vehicle
routing problem with time windows (vrptw). IEEE Access
vehicle routing problem with time windows. Artif Intell Eng
46. Onwubolu GC, Babu B, Clerc M (2004) Discrete particle swarm
approach for vehicle routing problem. Neural Comput Appl
echelon multi-trip vehicle routing problem with mixed pickup
and delivery demand and time windows. Transportation Research
optimization scheme for the capacitated dynamic vehicle routing
problem with time windows. Neural Comput Appl 33(1):409–432
sequential insertion algorithm and tabu search to vehicle rout -
ing problem with time windows. RAIRO-Operations Research
6. Zhang J, Li Y , Lu Z (2024) Multi-period vehicle routing problem
with time windows for drug distribution in the epidemic situation.
7. El-Sherbeny NA (2010) Vehicle routing with time windows: An
11. Kennedy, J., Eberhart, R.: Particle swarm optimization. In: Pro -
16. Alsalibi B, Mirjalili S, Abualigah L, Yahya RI, Gandomi AH
(2022) A comprehensive survey on the recent variants and appli-
19. Desrochers M, Desrosiers J, Solomon M (1992) A new optimi -
zation algorithm for the vehicle routing problem with time win -
20. Fisher ML, Jörnsten KO, Madsen OB (1997) Vehicle routing
with time windows: Two optimization algorithms. Oper Res
21. Kohl N, Desrosiers J, Madsen OB, Solomon MM, Soumis F
(1999) 2-path cuts for the vehicle routing problem with time win-
for the vehicle routing and scheduling problem with time window
52. Solomon MM (1987) Algorithms for the vehicle routing and
scheduling problems with time window constraints. Oper Res
Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to juris-
47. Hendtlass T (2003) Preserving diversity in particle swarm opti -
48. Wang K-P, Huang L, Zhou C-G, Pang W (2003) Particle swarm
(2014) Low-complexity particle swarm optimization for time-