Table 2. These settings were chosen 
based on a strategy that combines empirical knowledge, 
literature review, and preliminary experiments. This part 
introduces the strategy for tuning parameters within our 
MEAF framework, focusing on framework-specific param-
eters. The parameters for GA, PSO, and ACS follow their 
original algorithms, with well-documented tuning strategies 
in existing research.
Table 2 Parameter settings for the algorithms used in this paper
algorithm name parameter explanation value
Ant Colony 
System
colony size 100
parameter ρ for pheromone evaporation 0.3
parameter q0 for exploitation or exploration 
control
0.1
parameter β for distance influence control 2
parameter top-k for filter the exchange 
solution
1
Genetic 
Algorithm
population size 100
parameter ts for truncation selection 0.2
parameter mr for mutation ration 0.5
Particle Swarm 
Optimization
swarm size 100
parameter w for inertia weight 0.1
MEA VRPTW parameter T for at least keep the same time 
before exchange
5
parameter M for iteration of exchange 
intervals
15
parameter easthreshold  for the minimum 
number of EA instances
2
parameter sditer  for the earliest start dis-
solve iteration
50
parameter dfpercent  for dissolve factor 0.85
1 3
Page 13 of 22    57 
Z. Bai et al.
the customer time window; 75 customers in R208 have a 
larger acceptable service window than those in R211, while 
the other 25 customers have a smaller acceptable time win -
dow than those in R211. The GA algorithm and the PSO 
algorithm do not consider restrictions during path genera -
tion but only schedule vehicles according to the restrictions 
in the final stage of execution. On the other hand, the ACS 
algorithm considers the limits during the initialization phase 
when making pheromone assignments and when calculat -
ing the next direction of the ants. When the time window 
is small, the advantage offered by this consideration of the 
ant algorithm is more apparent compared to GA and PSO, 
while it is not apparent when the window is larger. In addi -
tion to that. when the ACS algorithm is not as good as GA 
in realizing such data, it amounts to a drag on the overall 
performance of the VRPTW algorithm. The opposite is true 
for use cases R102 and R105, where the time window of 
use case R102 is smaller overall, and the advantage of the 
ACS algorithm is more evident now. Solving this problem 
requires considering the time limit in the generation path of 
GA and PSO algorithms, which can be the direction of our 
subsequent future research.
We can analyze the results of the four algorithms on 
VRPTW in terms of their search mechanisms. Initially 
designed for continuous optimization problems, the PSO 
algorithm is unsuited for VRPTW due to its reliance on 
particle movement and velocity updating concepts. Since 
VRPTW is a discrete problem, the PSO algorithm needs 
to be discretized, but experimental results indicate that the 
selected concepts of particle movement and velocity updat-
ing are ineffective in harnessing the strengths of PSO for 
VRPTW. This suggests that PSO requires more advanced 
discretization strategies to be effective for VRPTW. Exist -
ing approaches struggle to preserve feasibility and diversity 
under complex constraints, which may explain their rela -
tively weaker performance compared with algorithms that 
are inherently more suitable for discrete combinatorial opti-
mization. In contrast, the Ant Colony System (ACS) algo -
rithm employs a step-by-step solution construction approach, 
effectively incorporating time window constraints into the 
route construction process. By enabling ants to communicate 
and share information through pheromone updates, ACS 
reinforces more favorable routes that adhere to time window 
constraints and minimize total travel in VRPTW. Regarding 
Genetic Algorithms (GA), the selection and mutation com -
ponents are vital in driving solution evolution for VRPTW. 
However, due to the complexity and constraints of VRPTW, 
GA may yield slightly inferior results compared to ACS. Tra-
ditional GA methods often fail to explicitly consider these 
constraints, resulting in the generation of infeasible solu -
tions. In contrast, ACS incorporates a pheromone-updating 
mechanism that considers time window constraints during 
crossover and mutation phases of the genetic algorithm, 
PMX and RSM were chosen, respectively, for other param-
eters that occurred in the experiment, as shown in Table 2.
MEAF introduces several framework-specific param -
eters (T, M, sditer, dfpercent), for which default values were 
used in the main experiments. A sensitivity analysis of these 
parameters is presented in Appendix A, as shown in Fig 5.
6.2 Result analysis
The results of the experiment comparing the elemen -
tary algorithms are shown in Table 3. This table presents 
the outcomes for 56 instances run on ACS, PSO, GA, and 
MEA VRPTW. “Avg.” denotes the average cost, and “Std.” 
stands for the standard deviation. The